---
title: The Closer to Luther, the Better the Theologian
author: apieper
translator: souk
language: German
issue: i7
date: 2006-08-04
published: false
---

This essay is taken from the <em>Quartalschrift</em> of January 1917. August Pieper explains the origin of that dear phrase below and more importantly in what way we should be closer to Luther. He has very practical applications to teachers and pastors for his time and ours.

Additional paragraph breaks have been added. Words in [brackets] are not in the original German or are added for clarification of a word. Footnotes are added for terms and people which may not be known to the average person or based on the importance of the word. To the glory of him, who brings forth great men for his church in times of great distress.

---

The intended and expressed peculiarity of this saying is that it wants to urge the direct theology of Scripture – in opposition to all too many “theology of the Fathers,” which is dominating around us.  One will hardly find in the thirteen annual sets of the Quartalschrift thirteen quotes (the word is taken in the usual sense) from the Fathers.  This is not arrogance.  We know very well that in theology we are pygmies against these giants.  But the theology of citations has the unavoidable result, with the ever-present human laziness, to place faith in human word and from that to write about the basis of Scripture.  It brings about a faith of tradition.  It happens that one receives a doctrine of Scripture truly only then, when it is known to a person.  Luther, Chemnitz, Gerhard, Calov, Quenstedt, and Walther have taught in such a way that one himself beholds and does battle with the doctrine of Scripture as a heretical innovation, when in the form of a statement, is it grasped in Scripture itself, instead of to join oneself to the traditional comprehension that has become distorted over the years.  The theology of citations places the veil of Moses over the face of the Holy Scriptures, so that we no more know its clear words, or unarbitrarily read into them the constructions of the fathers, yes so that we, being satisfied with the once attached theological background, no longer truly study Scripture itself, do not  truly become native in them [Scripture], do not come further in knowledge, stir up at conferences and synods again the dogmatic stock brought from school remembered more or less incompletely, always thrash the same phrases in the pulpit, finish our sermons, having become tired ourselves of our now-stale thoughts and having made our listeners tired of the same thing.  It is known, how Luther bewails this that the theology of the Fathers would have put Scripture completely under the bed, and how he urgently warns to let the writings of all the Fathers be only a frame for the zeal of Scripture as the only true well of theology and the correct spring of Israel.  But the saddest thing is that the theology of the Fathers all too easily puts faith in man instead of God’s Word.  It favors heresy and asks for quarrel and strife in the church.  What the latter touches upon, since it is and remains irreversibly true, which Luther himself so often stresses, “on earth, no clearer book has been written than the Holy Scriptures,” if one wants to only diligently study it and with a prayer for the Holy Spirit.   And that no theologian, also no Luther talks always and at every time exactly, definitely, in the same sense and reliably, so that it is a hundred times harder for example to understand Luther always exactly, thoroughly and completely than the Holy Scripture itself; yes so that everyone is led infallibly into many kinds of errors, who swears by it, however he does not know it thoroughly; does not have the account of its development, the oppositions and circumstances around which he writes; does not exactly pay attention; does not always lay the measuring rod of Scripture on it; and does not understand to place it into the correct harmony with itself.  People like Janssen, Denifle, Grifar, are speaking proofs of it that one, full of Luther quotes, can cover the biggest erroneous teachings and justify the most horrible sins, if one has suitable ignorance and the necessary evil.  With all his greatness, Luther is a fallible man, writer, and preacher.  Therefore let us not believe in him and decide any doctrine through him.  Not even for this, what is Luther“an”, it is authoritative, but solely for this, what is “Luther”an.  The symbolic books define the former and this is the first fallible norma normata, while the norma normans remains only the infallible Word.  All theology, which shows and decides a doctrine from the Fathers also from Luther, is not Lutheran, also not Lutheran in the least of all perceivable ways, but is heterotheology in principle, with which the church must always again break, if it does not want to give God’s glory to another and if it does not want the light for its feet be obscured. The Scripture, the revealed from heaven, clear, infallible, prophetic and apostolic Word of the great God himself --- the entire book alone is a light for our feet and a light for our path --- “So that your faith would not rest on human wisdom, but on God’s power,” 1 Cor. 2:5.
	And nevertheless, let us not only subscribe from the heart, but also stress with all power, the Professor at Altdorf’s saying, which is the pinnacle of this article (cf. Walther’s Pastorale, p.13).  Luther belongs to all the great ones of this world, as God gives them only in the great crisis, which happens around the world.  If one looks at him apart from the distinction between inspiration and illumination, Luther belongs in the same line as Moses, David, Isaiah, Paul.  Men as Jerome, and Augustine, St. Bernard, also Calvin –by no means to speak of Zwingli are below him; Flacius, Chemnitz, Gerhard, Calov, Walther are his little students.  As to the worldly sphere Koresch, Alexander, Attila, Genghis Khan, Napoleon belongs; so Luther belongs to the churchly sphere to especially the servants of God, who crushed all things before themselves without resistance, because God wants to accomplish a special work through them.  Luther’s special work was the revealing of the Antichrist, the church’s liberation from the thousand year yoke of Rome, (which had become final, outward, and also unbearable) and the reestablishment of the Gospel by the freedom of the children of God in Christ’s grace.  He essentially accomplished the deed in a short ten years (from the papal bull to the Imperial Diet at Augsburg) and securely set it down in the next 15 years for all time.
	Of what does Luther’s greatness consist?  Usually too much is attributed to one great man; three fourths of his greatness disappears in the fullness of time, the occasion of situations and circumstances.  Luther would have (and although he would have been still a greater man) accomplished little in the time of Innocent III.  The Lord Christ himself would have come too early at the time of Philip II.  Alexander’s work must first produce koine.  Rome must first lay its iron fists on people; establish an international commerce and exchange of ideas for the very possible development of the natural human culture and of its bankruptcy, before the Gospel could come into the Gentile world and have a footing.  So also Luther could truly first succeed with his Gospel after the Catholics had been uncovered as a curse on all of life’s aspects (if also only dark and unclear from the world.)  Luther would have shared in still the fate of Hus and Jerome from Prague at the time of the Council of Constance and would have accomplished just so less as they did, since he also would have stood better than they did in the doctrine of the church and predestination.
	But certainly in a great time must come a great man, when out of the new that should be born, something right and great should come.  He would have failed, if there was truly something else, but still by far not something better or entirely truly great (as today’s World War absolutely means a great turn in people’s lives.)  The World War, which began at the turn of the new century 1915/16, brought forth the greatest, which was possible since the appearance of Christ, because it marches upon their most significant sphere of life, the spiritual sphere, and because God gave for that purpose the greatest man since the time of Paul, as he had fulfilled his time.  Where does Luther’s greatness lie?  One would have to write a large book, to demonstrate in some measure the basic and exhaustive foundation.  Here we can only do this, to show Luther’s greatness in short strokes and to do it through a few words if possible.  It is understood that with a truly great man, all the members of the human spirit must be great.  A powerful understanding alone, also a deep and tender emotion alone, a flexible energy alone, or two of these together still do not make a great person.  Luther was provided with all the knowledge and all the dialect of the theological world at that time.  And since Paul, there has been no man in the church, who would have been equipped with so sharp and encompassing an understanding, with so deep a disposition, with so overwhelming an energy as Luther.  But all that is only the outer shell, not the true kernel of his greatness.  It was the “Spiritualness” in him.  God had poured out his Holy Spirit in so great a measure into this vessel which was equipped with so great a knowledge and natural gifts, as in no man since the time of Paul.  God had revealed to him the Gospel about the salvation of sinners in Jesus Christ and brought him to faith in this grace.  In the clearness, depth, and fullness of his Gospel knowledge, in the power, with which his heart had grasped and understood God’s will, lies Luther’s towering greatness.  With a word: Luther’s greatness lies in the greatness of his childlike faith.
	In Luther’s soul, great was a single thought as only proper from an early youth: it is once noteworthy, “to have a gracious God.”  It remained spoken a hundred times, but also unspoken, as the ruling thought of his life until the last sigh.  His strong consciousness of sins, his increasing knowledge of sins, his anxiety of sins, the unceasing crying to the gracious face of God, became all his and his father’s plans for his way of life around the house, and definitely his career.  After he found Christ, peace and the kingdom of heaven with him, this became for him the only great thing, the one.  It completed all his thoughts, drove all his feelings, ruled and governed all his will.  Luther’s soul life expanded entirely in the righteousness of Christ and in the interest of his kingdom.  Luther believed, believed, believed.  This is the secret of his strength, of his greatness.  That comes out from his entire work, from every single piece of the same, from all his writings as the one great thing in him; that moreover stands out especially in the three points of his occupation, which lies in the beginning, middle, and end of his life:  in the 95 Theses, in his very powerful, deep, clear, and most Gospel-grounded (his “best” as he calls them) pamphlet De servo arbitrio; and in the greatest work of his life, his “prayer of a dying person.”  We do not have room here, to show it exhaustively; every Luther-knower will agree with us with no objection, and every non-knower must become a knower, before it is known to him.  But one must not read through these three documents once.  Whoever wants to know Luther’s greatness and have the aforementioned use for us from these wonderful gifts of God in the church of the end times, he must know Luther’s history to some measure and not simply read the chief writings of Luther but always again read, study and then know this that in the kingdom of God on the earth, faith is a great and only fountain of all strength and greatness.  The righteous man will live of his faith.  It is known what role God’s Word has played in Luther’s spiritual growth and life.  All things are possible to him, who believes.  That has been proven true in him.  Luther believed the Lord as Abraham did.  That was his most outstanding characteristic.  How simple, childlike, how steady and firm, how trusted and unshaken did the man believe!  We remember only the burning of the papal bull, Worms, the stay at Wartburg, and his letter to the church princes while outcast in Wartburg, in which he wrote, “I come in a completely better defense of one higher than church princes; indeed I maintain I want to defend your princely graces more than they could defend me; who believes the most, he will here defend the most.”  His letters testify about such a childlike and still heroic faith, directly from the first dangerous time.  But also every writing, every work of Luther, all his great blows against Rome, against Muenzer and the clowns, against the heretics of the Sacrament, his monumental writings about the Lord’s Supper and the correct understanding of the Scriptures, his Galatians, his book about the bondage of the Will, his arrangement of the German worship service, his catechism, his Marburg disputes, his residence at Coburg, his maintenance as concerns the Smalcald League, his translation of the Bible, his attitude at the final proclaimed council, his Smalcald Articles, his firmness against Bucer, his final absolution by Schwieger, his understanding of the Lord’s Supper, his last powerful writing against Catholicism, his suffering and prayer, in short, every writing and every deed of Luther’s, until his childlike-joyous death, is a testimony for his simple, joyful, often troubled but firm, unshaken, heroic faith in Christ and his grace, in God and his promises, in the written Word.  
	Luther’s faith had become his utmost cry of life, so that for him Christ and his kingdom had become all, the world and its interests nothing.  Like Paul, he esteemed all as shadows in comparison to the exceedingly overflowing knowledge of Christ.  God, his grace, kingdom, God’s Word, and promise were for him nothing like a worldly, distant historical thing, but an immediate present thing.  He was on intimate terms with his heavenly Father.  He wrestled for him with prayer every single writing of his public life, every writing against his enemies, every power, which he used.  He converted him more intimately than with Melanchthon, Raethe, Hans and Lenchen.  How much, how strong, Luther has prayed!  He did not only change for but also with God.  In this faith, he offered daily to the ruler and Pope his neck, to the universities and learned his brow.  He conquered an uncanny load of work and a deep abyss of trials.  He was patient and devoted in the pain and death of his little daughter, under the personal slanders of his enemies, under the ingratitude of the German people, and of the half-heartedness of his fellow workers.  
One has misconstrued Luther, [namely] his manifold insults against his enemies.  Now, it cannot be denied that in his zeal for matters of God, here and there he has mixed in his vehement disposition, as he himself rather often knew; and his firmness is a piece of his peasant nature.  He himself even said, “Because flesh and blood lives, it is not possible that it must be subdued.” (IX 382)  But in the true sense, Luther has never insulted, slandered, and construed something to his enemies with error.  With correctness, Julius Koestlin said, “Also with the most vehement outbursts of his scorn it was always the zeal for the matters, which drove him, never a personal motivation for Luther.”  Luther grew very inwardly with the article of the Gospel, so that he perceived the work of Satan in all the works of enemies of the Gospel and in all the tools of the enemies of the same [Gospel]; and as such he dealt with them, whether is was the Pope, a Parisian, Loewener, Cologne person, Eck, Emser, Alveld, and Muenzer, Herzog Georg, and Heinz in England, Zwingli, Erasmus, Agricola, “the damned heathen” Aristotle, or “the living devils” the Jews.  He himself writes about what the last words touched upon, “Now then, perhaps the compassionate saintly one among us Christians might think, that I make it indeed too great and inedible (hard to swallow) against the poor, miserable Jews, so that I deal with them so scornfully and vainly.  Ah Lord God, I am much too little for that, to mock such a devil.  Truly I want to willingly do it, but they are to me too far over laden with scorns, and they also have a god, who is the master with scorns, and is called the abominable devil and evil spirit.  What I am able to mock for the same [devil] as an annoyance, that I should reasonably do, he would have also certainly deserved it.” (XX, 2040) 
	Luther neither is perfect in the skill and manner nor in the doctrine.  Until 1520/21 he was still stuck in several Catholic delusions, and he himself knew it; also later moles and mistakes did not completely disappear.  He was not freed of the doctrine of purgatory till late; in De servo arbitrio there is an entire section of philosophic arguments and inclination.  Moreover it shows itself still in his Disputations about the mystery of the Trinity from the year 1545.  But incorrectness is the common trait of all people, also of the greatest people, where God did not especially make something.  That moreover draws nothing from their greatness before men, only that they are permitted to not deify them in such a way and repeat all their writings unseen.  Luther is still the greatest of all of God’s people since Paul and will remain until the Last Day.
	Therefore it would be nothing less than an outrage for a Lutheran theologian, a leader in the church to not want to study Luther.  Truly first and mostly and in the one way are the Scriptures.  We do not want to speak about that here, but after the Scriptures, Luther is similar to the greatest among them.  He himself was never compared to the Scriptures, the authority of the Apostles and Prophets was never demanded for him.  With his writings, he wanted to be nothing other than a frame for the Scriptures.  Indeed he wanted, that all his books be lost, so that Scripture alone is read and studied, as the book, through which God speaks with us.  
It is not true that Luther had a wide-meshed, loose view on inspiration.  He has his own view on the extent of the canon.  He has rejected the Old Testament Apocrypha from the canon; he has maintained for his own person the last four books of the New Testament as apocryphal.  And who wants to prove to him that he was wrong about that?  For historically it does not stand firm, that they are apostolic and prophetic books, also it does not stand in the Scriptures.  God moreover has bound himself in Scripture in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles alone and in no other.  To God be thanks, that he also has preserved our understanding about that, to join us in something other (C.F. 517, 1; 568, 1).  With that he would allow everyone freedom to consider any book “what he wants.”  That is no loose attitude, but principally the only correct attitude to God’s Word.  E.g. Eph 2:20 where it is entirely possible that one can err in judgment about a book of such a kind, --- what harms no one.  Our theologians of the 16th century stood so staunchly, foremost Chemnitz; first in the 17th century the distinction slipped, and was finally entirely lost, which certainly was neither a sign of piety nor a profit for the church.  Luther distinguished between the books of piety, of the fear of God, and of a fitting attention towards God’s Word.  That was also a work of faith.  He wanted the Scriptures error free, the Word of the Holy Spirit himself.  Only the Apostles and Prophets talked and wrote without error.  Therefore in conscience, he allows no writing to be pushed along, which was not prophetic or apostolic, “the Christ not preached” and was without the stamp of the Holy Spirit on that.  Moreover what was prophetic and apostolic, that was for him the Word of the Holy Spirit and stands firmer than heaven and earth for him in its wording and letters.  
In any case, if a theologian is settled in the Scriptures, studied, knew, believed, honored, preached, taught, and held to their clear wording, it was Luther.  The Scriptures, the outer word of Scripture, the text was his comfort, his weapon and his trust against the devil, Pope, heretics, philosophy, reason and flesh.  A single word of Scripture made the world too narrow for him.  His attitude towards Scripture was not a historical perception of a strictly outward limited biblical codex, but a humble, joyful and unshaken faith in every word, in the saving power of God.  Because of that, even Balaam’s talking donkey stands firm for him, as a wise saying about the same Christ.  With a doctrine of inspiration, as the modern positive theology has it since rationalism, Luther would have subdued neither the Pope, Muenzer, nor Zwingli “They should let the word stand,” concludes the inspired text with him.
	In any case, the closer we come to Luther in this spirit of faith, so much better the theologian we will be.  Indeed, the better we believe, so much better, purer, mightier our theology will be.  The entire sum of knowledge about all the facets of life belongs to sound theology, a fundamental knowledge of the Bible before all things, just so a clear testimony of the saving truth; but the heart and star, juice and power, beginning, middle, and end of all theology is faith.  Christ, grace, and the Gospel must become for us a personal life and living, present reality; [it] must take captive, rule, and govern our thoughts, meditations, and endeavors, [namely] our entire lives; that must become great in us, against which everything earthly, temporal in us disappears.  As far as earthly, particular interests occupy us, so much and so far are we separated from the true theology.  [As long as] the heart is buried in earthly goods, indolence, luxury, pleasure, honor, attitude, and sway, that is the death of theology.
	What is missing from the church in our day?  Theologians i.e. Christians full of the spirit and faith of Paul and Luther, especially Christians of such a faith in a teaching position.  Why do we provide so few professors, pastors, and teachers today?  Because we believe so less and so many professors, ministers and teachers therefore are professionals.  Luther did not depend on what he was and what he became, but on this that God had called him as a teacher of his Gospel in and outside of Wittenberg.  He believed in the divinity of his doctorate call as well as in the divinity of his call as a minister.  He believed from the heart in his sin and condemnation; in the grace of Christ; in the Word of the promise and threat; in the Holy Spirit and his power; in his heavenly Father’s omnipotence, help, and assistance; and in the eternal glory after this miserable life.  His faith was his life’s strength.  Through faith, he has accomplished more in this world than all the prophets and apostles, prince and kings.  Through faith, he was daily clean like Paul, having died to death.  Through faith he placed his head confidently on the pillow of death.  He had brought out in the world something new, that had not been taught for 1000 years.  He had overturned the world, he, a man.  And then he lays in Eisleben on a bed, about to walk before his God and Judge with these words, “O you my heavenly Father, God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, you God of all comfort, I thank you, that you had revealed to me you dear Son Jesus Christ; in whom I believe, whom I have preached and known, whom I have loved and praised, whom the grievous Pope and all godless people curse, persecute and blasphemy.  I ask you, Lord Jesus Christ, let my soul be entrusted to you.  O heavenly Father, if I already must abandon this body and depart this life, then I still certainly know that I can remain eternally with you and no one can tear me from you hands.  Father, you faithful God.  Amen.”  That is faith in the face of death, where “to believe” is worthy.  In any case, the closer, we come to Luther in this spirit of faith that much better the theologian we will be.
	Luther’s spirit, one can understand and adapt to himself only from Luther’s writings, not from a book of quotes as “The Spirit of Luther’s Writings.”  We must study him in a written way. Whoever is not versed in Luther yet should start with the earnest zeal for Luther in this year of Luther and look to Luther’s faith with his eyes.  The best celebration of jubilee consists truly of this that we study Scripture itself in such a way so that nothing certainly remains unknown in the same [Scripture] for us, --- book by book, in faith, with the ceaseless prayer: “Lord, open my eyes, so that I behold the wonders in your Law.”  We must have the spirit of the Scriptures.  (This is to be presumed with every pastor and teacher.)  On the other hand less are the theologians, who study Luther.  Several people could gain absolutely no taste for Luther, however that is not Luther’s fault.  Who is, as he (with the exception of human weaknesses) must be as a reformer in that time.  God has made no mistake in the selection of his tool.  Also there are people, who could gain from Scripture itself no taste in their own clothes, since they also willingly listen to today’s preachers and willingly read a Christian book of edification.  The bible itself is for them too foreign and “unesse” to use the expression of Luther here.  That is entirely natural and nothing other is to be expected.  Who today would willingly wear the clothes of a disciple of Jesus or of the Reformation era, since the materials themselves would still be so costly?  As every time and nation have their own standard and their own pace in the dress of clothes, so also in their meanings of thoughts and in their diction.  What concerns Luther, not only his way of expression and of composition, but also the materials of his writings are much too heterogeneous for the one inexperienced in the Reformation history and its great questions, and more still to the one uninterested, to the one only living in the present and its interest, otherwise he would be able to find from the first and second test a taste for him.  One has this, which one nowadays uses for his Christina life, and as a pastor for his sermon and work of the congregation, indeed rather fitting and slimmer in modern writings. And indeed continually Luther moved himself completely and totally into the great opposition of his time and placed himself eternally against the Pope, Baptists, sacramental heretics etc, --- what mediately interests us today and here still, rather appears as ballast or entirely scraped.  To be found in Luther’s preference, one must first of all have a deeper and more penetrating interest in the Gospel and God’s kingdom, as only to gain the subject for a sufficient and edifying sermon.  There belongs still a thirst for a deeper and further spiritual and historical knowledge, development, and completion.  Who does not have that, he does not take a bite of Luther quite so bravely, or let himself still always go further [in Luther].  In regard to that moreover there is today a strong lack in the Lutheran position, therefore there is among us less proper students of Luther and still less knowers of Luther.  The majority are content with some shorter or longer “Lutherisity,” which one finds in many books as stock in trade.  This is an unsafe hindrance for the advancement of our knowledge of the Gospel; new enlivenment of our faith; and zeal for the house of God.  In accord with Scripture itself, we find it in no theologian to the degree as with Luther.  And it is still God’s will and ordinance, if also not the prescription that we hear, study this greatest prophet after the prophets according to 1 Cor. 12, Eph. 4 and Heb. 13:7 (whom he gave to the church of the last time out of special grace); always again kindle and strengthen our little light in his great light; deepen and expand our knowledge through his knowledge; and again always fertilize our spiritual life and work in his faith, zeal, and energy.
	Whoever only once earnestly approaches Luther; he will quickly be accustomed to him and will gain a taste for him.  We moreover would not counsel to take away pele-mele from Luther’s writings, which come to one directly under the hands. Also the volume by volume zeal is to be commended neither according to Walch (St. L[ouis]), nor according to the acquirer’s work.  For us there are three or four different ways, which we are able to enter upon with fruit.  Whoever possesses a prevailing historical interest, studies Luther’s chief writings in chorological order.  There the gradual increase and growth of the man and his word is to be observed, to which then also the zeal of the Reformation history really belongs.  This way is the most fundamental and most fruitful.  The opposite [way] consists of this that one places him quite always in doctrines and concerns, which especially interest one in the passing of time, because they [doctrines] come up openly or privately in question (as presently the doctrine of church and office among us.)  That is a practical way for people, who do not find time necessary for the systematic zeal for Luther.  The later Walther recommended to us for his time, because he had used it much.  It will make [one] grounded and firm in the individual teachings.  Also it demands much searching and in doing so remains still incomplete.  ---  for such a person, who has neither money nor time to entirely study Luther, it will be recommended to purchase a collection of the important  chief writings of Luther, as the collected books, and to fundamentally adapt it to oneself.  Before every sermon, to peruse a Luther sermon from the church and house sermons is indeed also something, however very little.  Therefore one can essentially ruin for himself a taste for him, if he does not read more.  We would advise to join the two first named methods.  Study with great precision every thing written by Luther, to which the hovering questions of time point.  At the same time moreover read the continuous chief writings of Luther in chorological order and indeed not skipping the letters to his friends, then in this, Luther is often revealed according to his most intimate pages and innermost heart.  In this year of jubilee all of us should certainly be interested in what Luther has written.  But it is indeed too much [to read] and many, especially from his first year, are neither fundamental nor ripe.  We would advise to begin with the important writings of the year 1520.  Also: On the Christian nobility, On the Babylonian captivity, On the Freedom of the Christian Man, Against the Bull of the Antichrist, also the sermon about Good Works.  From the next years, the Warning against Revolt, Warning against the Disdain of the Word, the writings about the Mass and its Misuses, About Spiritual and Monastery Vows, That the One Christian Congregation has the Right and Power etc., then On the Town Magistrates, the sermon about the chief points of a Christian Life (both from 1524), Against the Heavenly Prophets, Against the thievish etc. Peasants, the German Mass etc.  From the next couple of years the Truly Powerful polemical writings about the Lord’s Supper against the Zwinglians.  From the year 1530 the sermon, That One should keep [their] Children in School (today it should be printed as a pamphlet and distributed among our people, even On Town Magistrates), the letter circulated by translation, all the writings about the Keys.  From the year 1532 the writing about Sneakers and Crooked Preachers (they would create clarity about the doctrine of the Church with one blow), then About the Humble Mass and Ordination of Pastors.  From the year 1535, above all the Detailed Explanation of Galatians, from the years 1537-40 the writings Against the Contradictions and About the Councils and Churches.  And his precious explanation of Psalms, no one ought to leave unread.  Finally Luther’s confession about the Lord’s Supper and Against the Papacy established at Rome by the devil.  Luther’s “best” book, That the Free Will is Nothing, from the year 1525, remains as the strongest nourishment, the best until the end; It can override the great trials for the beginner.
	From all of Luther’s editions, the St. Louis one is the most suitable in every respect for the necessities of the spiritual teacher and people.  Who cannot purchase this, buy the books collected in ten volumes from our publication for $12.00; it honestly includes the chief writings.  But this year of Luther should be useful to stir up the congregations, to purchase a St. Louis edition for the sacristy.  The Weimar edition is not useful for the usual pastor.
	May God let this year of jubilee serve us above all for this reason: that we study Luther.  Therefore the Church would grow with greater blessing.  Then we would know what we should preach and present to our people this year.  Upon that it still approaches.  The outward holidays are still only a hoax.  We ourselves want to learn enough, about what Luther had lived and fought and to bring that to our people.  The real year of Jubilee consists of that.
August Pieper.

